well good afternoon we're moving in the
right direction and we need to keep
going and we can't stop now we must stay
strong our hospitals have capacity our
team is stockpiling PPE and our testing
strategy has allowed us to stay ahead of
this virus because the sooner we can
detect coulvet 19 the sooner we can stop
the spread and protect others from the
infection a few weeks ago on April the
10th I stood at this podium and promised
you that we were going to ramp up our
testing we set a target of 16,000 tests
per day by May the 6th and thanks to our
incredible team thanks to the hard
working folks in our health system we
beat that target in just over 20 days
later by May the 1st we hit 17,000 tests
a day the good news is were leading the
country in daily testing volumes both in
total tests and per capita over three
hundred and forty-two thousand tests
have been completed in Ontario to date
these gains are significant but we still
have a lot of work to do we will not
rest on our laurels that's why we remain
laser focused on ensuring we're testing
our most vulnerable we rapidly increased
testing and our long-term care homes
we're testing those and group homes
homeless shelters woman shelters and
other congregate settings and as the key
trends had in the right direction in the
health system continued to be
strengthened it gives us confidence it
gives us the confidence that we can
adapt it gives us the confidence that we
can reopen more places safely knowing
our health professionals have our backs
it gives us the confidence that we're
getting close
- opening parks that we're getting close
to opening retail for curbside pickup it
gives us the confidence that we're on
the right track
that collectively as a province we're
doing the right things and we're taking
the right steps that we're beating this
terrible terrible virus and it tells us
that we can't stop now
we need to continue looking out for each
other we need to keep taking the health
advice seriously we need to stay
vigilant and if we do if we stay the
course we will defeat this virus we can
and we will thank you and god bless the
people of Ontario I'll pass it over
deputy premier thank you Thank You
premier and good afternoon everyone when
we first announced kovat 19 testing
targets 4,000 tests were being conducted
per day on Thursday April 30th we
reached well over 16,000 tests in a day
nearly a week ahead of our target for
16,000 tests per day by May 6 we did so
by forming a province-wide Kovach 19
testing network that includes over 20
organizations this has allowed us to
eliminate the backlog of 11,000 tests
and then turn our focus to testing
priority groups and vulnerable
populations including every resident and
staff member in a long-term care home
indeed expanding testing is critical to
containing and limiting the spread of
this new virus both in our communities
and in long-term care homes and other
shared living spaces we are now a leader
in Canada in daily testing per capita
and ranked among the top globally still
we continue to invest in further
expanding our Kovach 19 testing our
strategy is focused on maximizing
testing capacity by working as an
integrated lab testing network across
the province this is being achieved
through daily check-ins
process is designed to address the need
for supplies test turnaround times
alternative approaches to processing and
emerging technology the integration of
our laboratory network will serve as an
enduring legacy once this outbreak is
over and a great example of how we can
strengthen our health care system
through integration to better serve and
protect the people of Ontario thank you
phone line for questions just a reminder
one question one follow-up first
question first question comes from
Martin reg Cohen from the Toronto Star
is go ahead hello my question is for the
premiere you talked a lot about the
impact of the pandemic on our nursing
homes and how you want to fix it
what's your personal view about the
ownership of nursing homes is there a
difference is there a difference between
private ownership and public ownership
in terms of the outcomes well I think
there's a difference but what I said
right from day one Martin the system's
broke and where we are gonna fix it but
if you don't mind Martin I'm gonna pass
it over to the minister a long-term care
thank you so you know our ministry that
was dedicated to long-term care started
in the summer and one of the first
things we looked at was capacity issues
in long-term care staffing issues in
long-term care many of these issues have
been decades in the making and this
sector was neglected for decades we look
across the board we see a different
homes being affected in many different
ways
but obviously it's staffing that is a
crisis right now and this is not
specific to any particular type of home
but we know that we need to move forward
with a plan coming from this once we are
done focusing on the the crises we have
at hand thank you for your question my
follow-up is for the premier you've
mentioned a lot of CEOs that you've
talked to over the last few weeks of
this pandemic have you also spoken to
Mike Harris in his capacity as chair of
Chartwell homes and if so what did you
learn from him what did you say to him
and if you have not yet will you reach
out to him and either way whether you
spoken to him or not what would be your
message to him and to other operators
private or public in this pandemic and
going forward what are what are they
telling you and what are you telling
them mr. Harris in particular well I
think one call six weeks from former
premier Harris Costello is doing and to
be frank I didn't even know he was the
chair of Chartwell but we're gonna have
that opportunity to sit down and fix
these issues right right across the
board but he basically the conversation
lasted a couple minutes how's your
family doing how's yours and that was
about it next question next question
comes from Haley Cooper from News Talk
10:10 please go ahead my first question
is for either you premier Ford or Health
Minister Christine Eliot we want to know
if the province is considered or that
already in the works at certain
hospitals in larger to medium-sized
cities where there's multiple hospitals
could some of those hospitals be
designated for kovat 19 patients and
therefore the the hospitals that won't
be treating Kovac 19 patients could
possibly be opened up to begin safely
doing elective surgeries well you're
pretty bang on there but I'm gonna pass
this over the Minister of Health
thanks yes thank you for the question it
is something that we are taking a look
at as we develop our plan to open up
elective procedures for cardiac cancer
surgeries and other orthopedic surgeries
that is one of these suggestions that we
have a Kovac free Hospital so that they
there's one that will deal with the
Kovac patients one that will deal more
with the elective surgeries but it's
dependent on that and a number of other
factors as well how these hospitals will
be able to open up because among other
things they will need to have the staff
some of the staffs as you know staff
members have gone to assist in long-term
care homes right now they also need to
have a their own supply of personal
protective equipment so that they can
conduct these surgeries in addition to
the the drugs and other medications they
need in order to be able to conduct the
surgeries so that is one of the elements
having a kovat free hospital is an idea
but there's a lot of other issues that
have to come forward but we are
finalizing a plan we hope to have it to
present to all of you very shortly
because we do know there are so many
people that are very anxious about
having their surgery particularly for
serious issues like a cancer and cardiac
issues so we are dealing with that and
as I said we hope to have information
more detailed information for you very
soon
thank you and my follow-up question is
for the premier we've been focused so
much on what businesses can reopen and
went but people really want to know when
they can safely hug a loved one like
their parents or siblings
you know when can they invite maybe a
small group of friends over to celebrate
birthdays and anniversaries and other
milestones so are we any quo
sir to getting an answer on that well I
think we're getting closer
right across the the province the
numbers are coming down Haley and I
think the opportunity will come
hopefully sooner than later again Haley
if I knew the exact date honestly I'd be
telling you in 10 seconds up here but
none of us really know the exact date
let's continue working hard all together
as a province and we have being and
those numbers are showing the results of
that the sooner we can have some loved
ones over you know right give them a hug
then then we're gonna get we're gonna
get that moving as quickly as possible
so let's just keep working on reducing
the numbers and the quicker we do that
the quicker we'll be able to have some
loved ones over or maybe a barbecue or
so next question next question comes
from Albert della kala from at global
news please go ahead uh my question is
for the premier what happens to parents
money if a day schools such as one that
we're investigating the GTA declares
bankruptcy under the emergency order
well that's a very good question and
Albert if you don't mind all I'll ask
our Minister that but we we did make
sure that we had the parents stop paying
they wouldn't lose their spot that was a
big issue at one point they were they
were paying daycare and the kids weren't
going to daycare so we were able to
secure that and also secure their their
spot in daycare but it's a good good
question hopefully hopefully we won't
have too many daycare facilities going
under but I will get back to you on that
offer thank you thank you
next question next question comes from
Randy Roth from CDH TV please go ahead
[Music]
greenhouse and nursery operators and
they're complaining that they are
playing on a level playing field for
guiding Sunday's sorry Randy
grocery store or or a summer store like
that that in those in those stories that
most groups from done centers they can
go in and pick out their own plants but
it's only curbside delivery at diving
centers when I stand alone come on open
bottle more with social distance yeah
you know some Randi again your anger
your bang on I think I thought it was
unfair to the reason some of the big box
stores were able to open up they had
pharmacies and food in it but they had
other items in there and do I agree it's
unfair yeah I agree and the aisles were
a little wider in the big stores but in
saying that stay tuned Randy we're gonna
have some good news for these folks this
week so we're gonna get moving on that
question was on the weekend we did a
story down in the hall of a north pole
about people not being allowed to go to
their cottages along the shore of Lake
Erie not a collapse of health in that
area I said you know no no people from
outside can go to their cottages and and
and the people that go to those cottages
just go they they just want to go
anybody and just and then we and the
chief medical officer felt when I asked
him last week said that he doesn't
really see a problem in now and I'm just
wondering if those people can't go to
their cottages should they be able to
get there talks about well you're
nailing all the questions are Randy
today because I agree with you I had a
conversation with one of the mayors of
Muskoka I've asked to get on a
conference call with all the the mayor's
in cottage country and we we did the
right thing and we're continuing to do
the right thing make sure that we social
distance and self isolate when we can
but as we see the numbers come down and
by May the 24th hopefully the numbers
are going to continue coming down we're
going to have a heart-to-heart
conversation this week with
Mayers there's only so long you can you
hold back taxpayers from going to their
their their cottages I'll give you an
example Muskoka Muskoka the vast
majority of taxes are paid through
cottages Cottagers and you know and the
economy up there when I was speaking of
the mayor people rely the retail stores
in the cottage country rely on Cottagers
from beginning of May probably April all
the way through to September that's
their livelihood so if people are
responsible the numbers continue to go
down we'll have that conversation so if
you follow up by the end of the week and
I think it's Wednesday or Thursday we're
having a a conference phone conference
and I'll get their input and I
understand what they're saying but if if
people go up to their cottage bring
their own food don't go to the stores
stay up there cottage by May the 24th
there's only so long I can hold the big
gates back from from these people
they're gonna want to go to their
vacation property I understand and I
think we've made the right decision
about the Cottagers but as we see the
numbers go down well let's just see what
happens but I'm gonna have that a
wholesome conversation with all the the
mayor's in the next couple days and
we'll see where we go from there next
question next question comes from Laura
stone from The Globe and Mail please go
ahead hi there my question is for
Minister Fullerton Minister it's my
understanding that there are still about
a dozen high priority long-term care
homes that have not yet received extra
help from hospitals extra staff as well
as more than a hundred homes in a
so-called yellow zone that also need
help so why has it taken so long and
when are these high priority homes going
to get the help they need well we're
tracking this very carefully and
monitoring the homes were in regular
contact with the homes to assess their
staffing situation on the PPEs and as I
mentioned before the staffing crisis was
pre-existing before
the pandemic hit and so we clearly
understand that the dire situation that
our most needy homes are in and we're
making sure resources are getting to
those homes
well we monitor the others so whether
this comes through haut hospitals or
home care or the military assistance
which we're all very grateful for but
we're making sure we get PPE to our
homes within 24 hours if they need it
we're making sure that we have staffing
that's adequate and making sure the
standards of care are held looking at
everything possible on the table to
support all of our homes as we get
through this crisis but why are there
fills of 10 homes that are in a high
priority zone that have not received
anything and also why aren't you
revealing which names and the province
needs the most help why can't you tell
the public and a family member that
their home is among them well what we
have is we've been very transparent we
have a list that's publicly available so
that people can see the status of the
homes and we're making sure that the
homes that are identified as urgent need
are getting the help that they need this
is an ongoing effort we're working
across the board to make sure our homes
get the support they need and 24 hours a
day we have a command table that has
priority aspects to it so making sure
that those regional tables get the
support to our homes that need it
there's a complete structure that is
coordinated to getting that help out to
our homes and we've been very
transparent about the numbers we've been
very transparent about the homes we've
been transparent about the homes needing
military assistance and I believe that
that is the approach that's necessary
transparency and we'll do everything
possible to make sure those homes get
the support that they need next question
next question comes from a Colin D'Mello
from CTV News please go ahead hi there
good afternoon my question is for the
premiere premiering other provinces and
some businesses feel a bit hesitant to
open because right now they don't have
the proper PPE available last week you
had mentioned that the province would
try to help businesses that need help
finding the proper protective equipment
for their employees do you have any more
clarity on exactly how the province will
help businesses find a PE well it's just
on the on the phone with a couple of
large retailers it's morning working
with the retail Association and other
associations within the retail sector
and you know they in some cases they
have better contacts than the government
over overseas on buying goods or some of
them are the largest buyers of goods put
into their stores and I mentioned to
them that we need to bring in as many
PPE items as possible they're telling me
they're there okay they can get it in so
I'm relying on the retail Association
and other large retailers if you have
extra Sheridan share with some of the
smaller retailers as well plus we're
ramping up on the domestic side on the
PBE especially the n95 s with Woodbridge
and we're going full out on the weekend
I went over to a gown and a mask
manufacturer here in Toronto to see how
they're coming along but it's all hands
on deck and as we're as every day goes
by more and more calls are coming in
saying that people want to invest and
open up a PPE manufacturing facility so
and we also have that fund 250 million
dollars to support people that want to
open up so we're doing everything we can
to make sure we get domestic supply as
soon as possible there's an ad a column
that goes by I don't talk to four or
five six people on being conservative
that want to open up in the and the big
the big players that don't have a
facility here folk too one of the big
big companies this morning and I said
you got to start manufacturing here in
Ontario or Canada somewhere he can't be
shipping it in from the US you know
these days are going to be over we're
gonna start relying on our on ourselves
rather than relying on these foreign
countries foreign governments
that when you know all heck breaks loose
they close the borders and say you're
not getting any more Goods we're all
over this and we've ramped up with a
couple disinfectant white companies as
well that are ramping up as well so
we're getting there but we're moving as
quickly as we can
next question okay and sorry thank you
for thank you and premier just on
education you know today was supposed to
be the day that students were heading
back to class obviously that's being
pushed back until next month at the at
the earliest if possible I'm just
curious about distance learning for
students um you have young children in
your extended family what have you been
hearing about how well distance learning
is working right now because some
teachers say it's quite difficult to
actually educate students virtually yeah
I think the the older kids kids in high
school and probably middle school they
they understand it the the younger kids
it's the five and six year olds telling
them they can't delay with little Susie
or Johnny it doesn't it doesn't really
sink in so that's something we really
have to focus on and and especially if
that the decision is made and the
decision has not been made if the kids
are going to go back and in June
sometime but a very good point calmly we
really have to monitor it but I think
the high school kids they they get it
matter of fact I know they get it and I
think the other kids in grades 6 7 & 8
they get it as well next question next
question comes from Cynthia Milliken
from City TV please go ahead
i premiers with you today you get your
toe in to opening up the copy economy
ever so slightly but I'm curious why
random community testing has not started
when experts say that it needs to begin
before the economy opens so that a
proper baseline is created why haven't
why hasn't the government started that
well I had that conversation with the
some of the folks on the health table
today and it is being started our main
crisis was obviously long-term care
retirement homes congregate living
location so we want to put all our
resources there first but moving forward
we're going to be doing that also I know
you didn't ask this question but I'm
gonna going to mention in anyways had a
conversation with a Deputy Prime
Minister today I'm going to follow up
with the the Premier's we have another
Premier's meeting I believe it's on
Thursday we need a national plan for
contact tracing and it's it's you know
right now each individual province is
doing it but we need a national plan
work with the federal government and all
all all the provinces the ten provinces
and the three territories it's
absolutely critical moving forward for
many reasons especially not to mention
research as well thank you and for
follow-up some provinces are QAR
creating family bubbles where they can
merge together and you know go see a
grandparent for example would that be a
next step in Ontario if the numbers
continue going down let's just see I
just I just don't want to answer right
right now this early maybe if you ask me
this next week we'll see some even
better results than what we've already
we've already seen next question next
question comes from at least rushing
from CBC please go ahead
hi there premier I look with some PS
abused in long-term care homes who
contracted Kovac 19 after taking care of
infected residents with just a surgical
mask they say they want the option of an
n95 mask and there is some evidence out
there that points to the possibility
Koba 19 can be spread via airborne
particles so why not take all possible
precautions and give health care workers
the option of an n95 mask as the
research is coming in well I agree but
money passes orders administer a long
term care
thank you so first of all I want to
acknowledge all of our frontline the
personal support workers who are so
dedicated and compassionate every single
day and how much I appreciate it
looking at the PSW and the peep-peep EES
understanding the chief medical officer
of health gives directives in terms of
the required PPE surgical masks are what
is required for kovat 19 according to
the chief medical officer of Health of
course
evidence is always evolving and the
scientific literature is being vetted by
by our public health officials public
health Ontario and dr. David Williams
and so this is something that that will
be have to be ongoing in terms of
understanding the spread of Koba 19
thank you and my next question is for
the premier we've spoken to some
business owners who say they were caught
off guard by Friday's announcement about
opening up and they would have
appreciated more time to get the PPE and
implement the appropriate safety
protocols we've also heard from garden
centers that say it's too late
for a lot of their flowers and plants
that are going to waste so my question
kind of double-barreled when do the
province inform these businesses of the
plans to reopen and couldn't places like
garden centers have been opened this
entire time with physical distancing
measures in place like grocery stores
well with with anything we we talked to
the the Ministry of Health we talked to
the health table talked to the Minister
of Labour we talked to the stakeholders
the the business sector that they're
involved in and we get their input
there's never never a decision that one
person makes a lot I don't make a
decision by myself I always always
consult with people we we try to give
them a few days but all those businesses
were all seasonal businesses outdoor you
know gardening and landscaping or other
areas even the the rain is too so
they're they haven't been a
a huge issue that I've heard on the on
the retail side because we really
haven't opened up the the small retail
stores yet but when when we make that
announcement I
I'll give you the message right now
retail start start prepping you no
matter if it's three weeks four weeks
two weeks whenever it is start prepping
getting getting masks ready so there's
the there's the morning right now it's
coming it's inevitable the numbers keep
going down we're gonna get the economy
going based on health and science I got
to keep emphasizing that just because we
open up these stores it doesn't mean
it's a it's a free-for-all we still have
to follow the protocol the chief medical
officer and we're gonna continue making
sure that we take those measures last
question last question comes from Russia
under say me from privacy media group
please go ahead
good afternoon premier designee from
kawase premier ethnic media outlets in
Ontario and all over country I think
very vital role to to inform their
communities a hundred and thousands of
people whose first language is neither
English nor French but these businesses
businesses are struggling at the moment
premier they are not able to print their
newspapers they are not able to
broadcast the radio shows because they
don't have any ad revenue which is the
only source of their income so having a
small size operations most of their
staff is not on payroll like paper
distribution or sales so they are not
eligible for $40,000 alone from the
federal comment and not for 75% wages
benefit so they are really struggling
any help they can expect from the
government well very very good point and
right as soon as we put out the
advertising budget my first comment out
of my mouth was we're making sure that
the ethnic media gets a piece of the pie
to keep them going
I want to thank I'm just the ethnic
media but media in general you've been
absolutely incredible getting the
message out we've all worked together
and I just want to thank the media for
doing that but
maybe what we do is follow up on a call
because right from the get-go
everyone should get an equal piece of
the pie per se and I emphasize to make
sure the ethnic media ended up getting
some funding for advertising about coltd
I will follow up on that my follow up
question is regarding emergency rental
assistance and also by the prime
minister I have three questions the
first question is that PMI which is very
substantial part of the gross rent is
that included in this rent in this
assistance and number two most of the
landlords are not willing to take that
forgivable loan and put their 25% share
so that is why most of their you know
businesses they have got already notice
what I understand I'll confirm this with
the finance minister it's all inclusive
it wasn't before now it is so just to
break it down the landlord would pick up
25% the tenant would take 25% and the
federal and provincial governments would
pay the the 50% and it's over a nine
hundred million dollar plan and
hopefully they can work through this but
if we continue if we continue seeing the
downward slope hopefully we won't be in
this position over the next few weeks as
long as we get approval from the chief
medical officer our health team and our
Minister of Labour I just want to keep
emphasizing that because I just don't
want people thinking we're gonna open up
and you know we're all free to do what
we want was just not going to be that
way for a while
but hopefully we'll be able to get these
stores opened up sooner than later thank
you thank you everyone thank you